
    PORK Slaughtering, Cutting, Preserving, and Cooking on the Farm


          UNITED STATES     FARMERS’            _PREPARED BY_
          DEPARTMENT OF     BULLETIN             SCIENCE AND
          AGRICULTURE       NUMBER 2265          EDUCATION
                                                 ADMINISTRATION




                              CONTENTS

                                                           Page

    Selection and Care of Animal before Slaughter             3
    Preparing for Slaughter                                   4
    Slaughter                                                 7
    Chilling the Carcass                                     35
    Cutting                                                  36
    Freezing and Frozen Storage                              53
    Further Processing                                       54
    Meat Cookery                                             62
    Precautions                                              63
    Other Publications                                       64




                                                 Issued June 1978
                                      Slightly revised April 1981

              For sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
              U.S. Government Printing Office
              Washington, D.C. 20402




                      Pork Slaughtering, Cutting,
                   Preserving, and Cooking on the Farm

  By H. Russell Cross, _Research Food Technologist_,[1]
  E. Curtis Green, _Meat Marketing Specialist_,[2]
  William R. Jones, _Extension Meat Specialist_,[3]
  Roger L. West, _Associate Professor, Meat Science_,[4]
  and Anthony W. Kotula, _Chief, Meat Science Research Laboratory_,[1]
  (Photographs by Donald K. Rough[1] and Terry K. O’Driscoll[5])

  [1] Meat Science Research Laboratory, Northeastern Region, SEA-FR,
      Beltsville, Md. 20705.

  [2] Standardization Branch, Meat Quality Division, Food Safety and
      Quality Service, Washington, D.C. 20250.

  [3] Cooperative Extension Service, Auburn University, Auburn, Ala.
      36830.

  [4] Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, Gainesville,
      Fla. 32611.

  [5] Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Northeastern Region,
      SEA-FR, Beltsville, Md. 20705




           SELECTION AND CARE OF ANIMAL BEFORE SLAUGHTER

Several factors should be considered before slaughtering a hog for
home consumption. The most important considerations are health, kind
of animal (barrow, gilt, sow, or boar), expected meat yield, and care
of the animal prior to slaughter.


                               Health

You should take care that an unhealthy animal is not selected for
slaughter. At the time of selection, look for signs of sickness such
as fever, increased breathing rate, and diarrhea. Animals suspected of
being unhealthy should be treated by a veterinarian until the animal
is returned to a healthy state.


                            Animal Care

It is important to exercise proper care of the animal prior to
slaughter, if you expect to obtain high quality meat. Pen the animal
in a clean, dry place the day before slaughtering. Restrict the animal
from feed 24 hours prior to slaughter, but provide access to water at
all times. The slaughter of hot, excited animals increases the risk of
sickness, injury, and darker meat; therefore, do not run the animal or
wrestle with it. Bruises and whip marks cause bloody spots which must
be trimmed out.


                     Animal Type and Meat Yield

Highest quality pork is produced from young, healthy, well-fed, meaty
hogs that weigh from 175 to 240 pounds. The meat-type hog should have
full, plump, meaty hams and straight, smooth sides. Fat should be
firm, evenly distributed, and not more than 1.6 to 1.7 inches average
thickness over the back. The average meat-type hog produces as much
pork as a family of two consumes in 10 to 12 months. Heavier, fatter
hogs produce less lean and more excess fat.

A meat-type hog, when cut and trimmed according to the methods
described later, will yield approximately 65 to 70 percent of its
carcass weight in ham, picnic shoulder, loin, bacon, and Boston butt.
Expected yields of major and minor cuts from a U.S. No. 2 hog are
presented in table 1.

  Table 1._—Percentages of major and minor cuts from a U.S. No. 2 hog,
                     trimmed according to USDA procedures_
  -------------------------------------------------------------------
  Cuts                                   Percentage of USDA
                                           carcass weight
  -------------------------------------------------------------------
  Ham (trimmed)                                    19
  Belly (untrimmed)                                18
  Collar, fat back, and clear plate                18
  Picnic shoulder and Boston butt (trimmed)        17
  Loin (trimmed)                                   17
  Feet, tail, and neckbones                         5
  Spareribs                                         3
  Jowl (untrimmed)                                  3
                                              -----------
                                                  100
  -------------------------------------------------------------------
  Four lean cuts[1]                                53

  Adapted from Smith, King & Carpenter, 1975.
  [1] Ham, loin, picnic shoulder, and Boston butt.


The slaughter of boars is not recommended. Meat from boars has a
strong odor during cooking, and an off-flavor. This “sex” odor and
flavor is often identified as being “soapy,” and the odor increases as
boars approach sexual maturity. If old boars are to be slaughtered,
they should be castrated and allowed to heal prior to being slaughtered.




                      PREPARING FOR SLAUGHTER

Prior to the day of slaughter, select the slaughter site, accumulate
all equipment, prepare for waste disposal, and, if necessary, arrange
with a local processor or meat market for chilling and cutting the
carcass. If you plan to have the carcass chilled and cut up, make
arrangements concerning the time and day on which the carcass can be
accepted, the charges, and specific instructions for chilling,
cutting, and wrapping.


                           Site Selection

Slaughter site selection is extremely important. The amount of space
and equipment needed will depend on the method (scalding or skinning)
used. If the carcass is to be scalded, be sure that a site is selected
where a fire can be built, and clean, running water is available. If a
tree is to be used to suspend the carcass, select a healthy limb, 6 to
8 inches in diameter and 8 to 10 feet from the ground. This will
ensure that the limb will not break from the weight of the carcass,
and the carcass can be fully extended above the ground for viscera
removal and splitting. If the animal is to be slaughtered in a
building, be sure that a strong beam 8 to 10 feet from the floor is
available. The floor should be clean and, preferably, concrete.

After selection of the slaughter site, clean up the area to ensure
that leaves and dirt are not blown on the carcass during slaughter. If
the site has a wooden or concrete floor, wash the floor and all
equipment with plenty of soap and water. Be sure to rinse thoroughly
because sanitizers discolor the meat and may cause off-flavors. If
animals are to be slaughtered outdoors, use straw to cover the area
where the carcass will be suspended and eviscerated.

The weather on the day of slaughter should also be considered. During
hot weather, the animal should be slaughtered during the cooler early
morning or late evening hours. Since an inexperienced person will take
2 to 3 hours to complete the slaughter operation, care should be taken
to avoid long exposure of the carcass to high temperatures. During
cold weather of less than 30° F, the animal can be slaughtered at any
time, because spoilage bacteria do not grow rapidly at cold
temperatures. During periods of extremely cold weather, avoid letting
the carcass freeze immediately after slaughter because the meat will
be less tender than if it is permitted to chill without freezing.
Slaughter during high winds may result in dirt and other contaminants
being blown onto the carcass.


                           Waste Disposal

All waste products should be disposed of in a sanitary manner. If the
animal is to be slaughtered in the open, select a site with good
drainage so that blood and water can drain away from the carcass. Do
not allow blood and water to pollute nearby streams or other water
supplies.

Disposal of viscera and hair is often a problem. Arrange to have a
local processor or rendering plant pick up these wastes. If this is
not possible, bury them so that dogs and other animals cannot dig them
up. Hair can be burned.


                        Slaughter Equipment

Elaborate and expensive equipment is not necessary but certain items
are essential (fig. 1). The amount of equipment will depend on the
slaughter procedure used. If the carcass is to be scalded rather than
skinned, additional equipment will be needed (items 16 to 23). The
following slaughter equipment is recommended:

  1. .22 caliber rifle with long or long rifle cartridges
  2. Sharp skinning knife and steel
  3. Boning knife
  4. Block and tackle or chain hoist—should be strong enough to
     hold weight of pig to be slaughtered
  5. Chocks—concrete blocks work well
  6. Meat saw
  7. Oil or water stone
  8. Ample cold water for washing hands, equipment, carcass and
     byproducts
  9. Tree with strong limb, beam or tripod 8 to 10 feet high, or
     tractor with hydraulic lift
  10. Spreader (gambrel or metal pipe)
  11. Buckets (2 or 3)
  12. Ice or cold water
  13. Straw for placing under animal during evisceration and splitting
  14. Clean cloths or plastic for protection of meat during transport
  15. Clean string
  16. Scalding barrel
  17. Pot or barrel for heating water
  18. Bell scrapers (1 or 2)—these are not necessary but helpful
  19. Plywood or other solid material for scalding platform
  20. Thermometer which registers up to 200° F
  21. Dry wood for fire
  22. Hog or hay hook
  23. Propane torch or blow torch

  [Illustration: Slaughter equipment displayed]
  Figure 1.—Equipment for slaughter.

Be sure that all equipment that will come in contact with meat is
thoroughly cleaned. Blood and other materials that get on the outer
garments of workers during slaughter should not be transferred to the
carcass after it is washed.

Additional equipment needed for cutting the carcass is listed in the
section, “Cutting.”




                             SLAUGHTER

                              Stunning

The animal should be killed as quickly and humanely as possible. In
most slaughter plants, hogs are immobilized either by electrical
stunning or carbon dioxide gas suffocation. On the farm a hog can be
stunned by striking it one sharp blow with a mechanical stunner or by
shooting it in the forehead midway between and slightly above the
eyes. The first attempt should be successful (fig. 2). Improperly
placed bullets could cause the animal much pain and injure helpers or
other livestock. Animals that become excited during stunning will not
bleed as well as those less excited. _As always the case whenever using
firearms, exercise all appropriate safety precautions_.

  [Illustration: Rifle muzzle pointed at forehead of hog]
  Figure 2.—Stunning.


                              Bleeding

Bleeding is a very important part of the slaughtering operation. The
animal should be bled within 2 minutes after it is down because the
blood pressure may increase and thus break the capillaries and cause
an unattractive condition in the meat called “blood splash.” Although
meat with this condition is safe for consumption, it is quite
unpleasant in appearance.

After stunning the animal, place it on its back, perfectly straight
with the head close to the ground. A helper can stand over the animal
and hold its front legs. Locate the tip of the breastbone, along the
midline (fig. 3). A 6-inch sticking knife sharpened on both sides of
the tip is best. However, a regular boning or skinning knife can be
used. Hold the knife at a 35 to 40-degree angle, thrust it under the
breastbone with the point aimed toward the tail and then give an
upward thrust (dip the point) to sever the carotid artery (figs. 4 &
5). No twisting or cross-cutting of the knife is necessary. If the hog
does not bleed, insert the knife a little deeper a second time and
there should be little difficulty getting a good stick. To avoid a
“shoulder stick” do not insert the knife too far to either side. The
bloody tissue resulting from a shoulder stick will subsequently
require trimming. Care should also be taken to make certain that the
hog does not kick you or the knife.

  [Illustration: Man placing finger on tip of breastbone]
  Figure 3.—Locating breastbone.

  [Illustration: Side view drawing of supine hog with knife inserted]
  Figure 4.—Sticking (bleeding).

  [Illustration: Photo showing positions of workers during sticking]
  Figure 5.—Positions for sticking.


                        Hair or Skin Removal

Once the animal is bled, the hair can be removed by scalding the
animal in hot water and scraping; or the skin and hair can be removed
by skinning. Traditionally, hogs have been scalded and scraped, and
the skin is left intact. Both procedures will be discussed because
many people now find the skinning method to be easier, to require less
equipment, and to result in an equally acceptable final product.


_Scalding and Scraping Method:_

For scalding, the most important consideration is maintaining an
adequate supply of properly heated water. Approximately 50 gallons of
near boiling water will be needed for each pig. This water should be
ready (boiling) before the animal is stunned and bled. After the hot
water is placed in the scalding barrel, it can be adjusted to the
proper temperature for scalding by adding cold water.

The animal can be scalded by several methods. The easiest method is to
have two barrels, one for heating the water and one for use as a
scalding vat. Fifty-five gallon barrels will be large enough for most
hogs. The scalding barrel can be buried in the ground at a slight
angle; thus movement of the hog in and out of the barrel is easier
(fig. 6). Be sure the angle of the barrel is not too flat or the
barrel will not hold enough water to cover the carcass. Another method
for scalding is to have a scalding vat or a barrel under which a fire
can be built. This method requires more construction, and the
temperature of the water is difficult to control.

  [Illustration: Partially buried barrel adjacent to a plywood board]
  Figure 6.—Scalding equipment.

Slow scald is usually best. Scalding water temperatures between 140°
and 145° F are optimal. At these optimal temperatures, 3 to 6 minutes
of scalding are required to loosen the hair and scurf (layer of
accumulated oil, dirt, and the outer layer of cells on the skin). In
the fall when the winter hair is beginning to grow, the hair of most
hogs is difficult to remove. Higher water temperatures (146° to 150°
F) or longer submersion times are usually required for scalding during
this “hard-hair” season. About ¼ cup of rosin, lime, or some other
alkaline material added to the scald water to aid in scurf removal
results in a whiter skin.

On the farm, regulation of water temperature is difficult. Add boiling
water to the scalding barrel, then add cool water to adjust to the
proper temperature. Begin with the scalding water at 155° to 160° F
because it cools rapidly. At these high temperatures, the carcass must
be kept in motion and pulled from the barrel several times. This
movement prevents overscalding. Overscalding causes the skin to
contract around the base of the hair (“setting the hair”) and cooks
the skin. If the carcass is overscalded, the hair is extremely
difficult to remove.

After the proper water temperature has been attained, place the pig in
the barrel, head first (fig. 7). Rotate the carcass in the barrel,
pulling it in and out of the water occasionally. Check the hair often
for ease of removal. The hair slips first over the back and sides,
then in the flank regions. When the hair can be pulled easily in the
flank regions behind the shoulders, remove the hog from the barrel and
place the rear of the hog in the water.

  [Illustration: Man holding hog in scaling barrel]
  Figure 7.—Scalding head first.

While the rear of the hog is scalding, pull the toe nails and dew
claws from the front feet by inserting a hook into the top of the nail
and pulling (fig. 8). Scrape as much of the hair on the head as
possible, especially around the ears and snout (fig. 9). When the hair
slips in the rear flanks, remove the hog from the barrel. Remove the
toe nails and dew claws from the rear legs and pull the hair from the
tail.

  [Illustration: Hook removing toe nail]
  Figure 8.—Removing toe nails.

  [Illustration: Knife scraping cheek hairs]
  Figure 9.—Scraping head.

Grip the legs with both hands and twist to pull off the hair. Remove
the hair in the difficult areas (head, feet, jowl) first, then proceed
to the easier areas (back, sides). If you use the bell scraper, tilt
the scraper upward on the forward edge and pull the scraper forward,
applying as much pressure as possible (fig. 10).

  [Illustration:Man scraping head of hog in scalding barrel]
  Figure 10.—Scraping head.

Scrape the hot carcass as quickly as possible because the skin tends
to “set” as it cools. If patches of hair and scurf are difficult to
scrape, cover them with a burlap bag and pour hot water over them.
Scraping is made easier by moving the legs or the head in order to
stretch the skin, smoothing the wrinkles along the sides.

After most of the hair has been removed, pour water over the carcass
and continue scraping. Place the scraper flat against the skin and
move it in a rotary manner (fig. 11). This procedure aids in removal
of scurf and dirt as well as removal of the rest of the hair. If
patches of hair cannot be removed with the scraper, use a knife. Some
people prefer to use a knife for the entire operation.

  [Illustration: Man scrapping the side of a hog]
  Figure 11.—Scraping middle.

The carcass is now ready to be suspended. Clean the feet by cutting
away the soles of the feet and cutting between and around the toes
(fig. 12). Expose the gambrel tendons by cutting through the skin on
the backs of the rear legs from dew claws to hock (fig. 13). Cut down
each side of the tendons, being careful not to cut the tendons (fig.
14). Insert the spreader or gambrel under both tendons on each leg.
Secure the legs to the spreader bar and suspend the carcass (fig. 15).

  [Illustration: Man holding toes of hog’s feet]
  Figure 12.—Cleaning feet.

  [Illustration: Man running knife up back of hog’s hind leg]
  Figure 13.—Exposing gambrel tendons.

  [Illustration: Man hold hog leg with thumb between bone and tendon]
  Figure 14.—Exposing gambrel tendons.

  [Illustration: Hog suspended with legs tied to spreader]
  Figure 15.—Suspending the carcass.

If available, a propane torch or blowtorch can be used to singe the
remaining hair and scurf (fig. 16). Singeing removes most of the hair
and allows small, light hairs to be seen. Use caution during singeing
to prevent burning the skin. Shave the remaining hair and wash the
carcass thoroughly. Continue with evisceration and splitting (pages
24–35).

  [Illustration: Man holding propane torch near hog’s ear]
  Figure 16.—Singeing.


_Skinning Method:_

The skinning procedure used for pork carcass is similar to that used
for beef carcasses. Skinning requires less equipment and can be done
faster than scalding and scraping. We have commonly believed that the
skin was needed on hams and bacon to assure proper curing; however,
this belief is not necessarily correct. A poor skinning job can lower
the quality of the belly for bacon.

After stunning and bleeding the animal, move the carcass to the
location of the hoisting equipment. Place the carcass on a sheet of
plywood, a concrete slab, or straw. Wash the blood and dirt from the
carcass. Turn the carcass on its back and hold it in place with blocks
placed on each side (fig. 17).

  [Illustration: Hog in supine position on plywood sheet]
  Figure 17.—Position for skinning.

Cut the hide around the rear legs, just below the dew claws (fig. 18).
Make a cut through only the hide, down the back of the leg, over the
hocks, and to the midline at the center of the hams (fig. 19). Skin
around each side of the leg, removing the hide to a point below the
hock (fig. 20).

  [Illustration: Man holding knife cutting around hog’s ankles]
  Figure 18.—Cutting skin around legs.

  [Illustration: Man holding knife cutting hide between rear legs]
  Figure 19.—Cutting to midline.

  [Illustration: Hog with hide pulled back at rear legs]
  Figure 20.—Skinning legs.

Open the hide down the midline from the point where the animal was
stuck, around each side of the pubis area and continue to the anus
(fig. 21). Make this cut by inserting the point of the knife under the
skin with the blade turned up. This procedure is referred to as
cutting from inside out and protects against meat contamination from
materials on the hide. Avoid cutting too deeply because you may
puncture the intestine and contaminate the carcass.

  [Illustration: Man running knife down midline of hog]
  Figure 21.—Cutting down midline.

Remove the hide from the insides of the hams (fig. 22). Be careful, it
is very easy to cut through the fat into the lean. Continue skinning
along the sides toward the breast. Grasp the loosened hide in the
opposite hand and pull it up and out. This places tension on the hide,
removes wrinkles, and allows the knife to glide smoothly. Holding the
knife firmly, place it against the hide with the blade turned slightly
outward (fig. 23). Skin as far down the sides as possible, but not
around the front legs (fig. 24).

  [Illustration: Knife removing hide at upper rear legs of hog]
  Figure 22.—Skinning hams.

  [Illustration: Knife cutting away hide from abdomen of hog]
  Figure 23.—Siding.

  [Illustration: Picture of hog with hide pulled back from sides.
  Figure 24.—Siding.

Return to the rear of the carcass and remove the hide left on the rear
of the hams (fig. 25). Do not skin the outside of the hams at this
time. Remove the rear feet by sawing through the bone about 2 inches
above the hock (fig. 26). Insert the spreader under the large tendons
on the rear legs (fig. 27) and secure the legs to the spreader.

  [Illustration: Knife removing hide at upper rear legs of hog]
  Figure 25.—Skinning rear of hams.

  [Illustration: Saw cutting off lower foot]
  Figure 26.—Removing feet.

  [Illustration: Knife shown between leg bone and tendon]
  Figure 27.—Exposing tendon.

Hoist the carcass to a convenient working height (waist high) for skin
removal from the outside of the hams. Skin around the outsides of the
hams, leaving as much fat as possible on the carcass. Remove the hide
around the anus and cut through the tail at the joint closest to the
body (fig. 28). Pull the hide down over the hips (fig. 29). The hide
along the hips and back can be pulled off, leaving the fat on the
carcass. Occasionally, you may need to use a knife to cut between the
skin and the fat if large pieces of fat are being pulled off.

  [Illustration: Knife shown removing hide from rear of hams]
  Figure 28.—Skinning rear of hams.

  [Illustration: Hanging hog with hide half removed]
  Figure 29.—Removing hide from back.

Hoist the carcass to a fully extended position. Open the hide down the
rear of the forelegs. Remove the hide on each side of the forelegs
(fig. 30). Skin along the inside of the forelegs and neck. Skin along
the outside of the shoulders and jowls to a point approximately half
way to the back of the carcass (fig. 31).

  [Illustration: Hanging hog with man removing hide near front legs]
  Figure 30.—Skinning forelegs.

  [Illustration: Hanging hog with hide removed from chest]
  Figure 31.—Skinning sides and back.

Slowly pull down and out on the hide (fig. 32), removing it along the
back. If the fat begins to tear, use a knife to correct the torn area
and then continue pulling the hide. Remove the hide as far down the
back as possible (fig. 33). When it becomes difficult to pull along
the top of the neck, complete removal with a knife.

  [Illustration: Hanging hog with man pulling down hide in back]
  Figure 32.—Pulling hide from back.

  [Illustration: Hanging hog with man pulling down hide in back]
  Figure 33.—Pulling hide from back.

If the head is to be saved, skin over the poll and down the face (fig.
34). Remove the hide at the snout. Remove the front feet by sawing
just below the knee joint (fig. 35). Continue with evisceration and
splitting.

  [Illustration: Man using knife around hog’s neck]
  Figure 34.—Skinning head.

  [Illustration: Man using saw to remove lower part of front leg]
  Figure 35.—Removing front legs.


                            Evisceration

Loosen the anus by cutting around it, deep into the pelvic canal. Pull
outward and cut any remaining attachments (fig. 36); be careful not to
cut into the large intestine. When the anus is loosened, tie it with a
piece of string to avoid contaminating the carcass (fig. 37).

  [Illustration: Man using knife around anus]
  Figure 36.—Loosening anus.

  [Illustration: Man tying shut anus]
  Figure 37.—Tying anus.

Remove the penis from a slaughtered barrow. Cut through the skin and
fatty tissue along each side of the penis and around the penis
opening. Lift upward and cut underneath it along the midline (fig.
38). Cut along the penis between the hams, pull the penis upward and
remove it at its attachment at the base of the ham (fig. 39). Continue
the cut made between the hams, at their natural separation, exposing
the white connective tissue. Cut through the tissue to the pelvic
(aitch) bone. Continue cutting through the cartilage between the aitch
bone and separate the hams (fig. 40). This procedure is satisfactory
in young pigs; however, a saw may be needed to split the aitch bone in
older hogs.

  [Illustration: Man exposing hog’s penis]
  Figure 38.—Removing penis.

  [Illustration: Man cutting around hog’s penis]
  Figure 39.—Removing penis.

  [Illustration: Man slicing through pelvic cartilage to split hams]
  Figure 40.—Splitting pelvic bone.

Make a cut through the lean and fat from the point where the pig was
stuck to the upper end of the sternum or breastbone (fig. 41). Insert
the knife at the top edge of the sternum, cut downward and slightly
off center to open the chest cavity (fig. 42).

  [Illustration: Locating the tip of sternum with fingers]
  Figure 41.—Tip of sternum.

  [Illustration: Man pushing knife down through sternum]
  Figure 42.—Opening the sternum.

Open the midline, beginning at the opening made when the aitch bone
was split. With the handle of the knife inserted in the opening and
with the blade pointed outward to avoid cutting the intestines (fig.
43), open the midline to the opening made at the breast (fig. 44).
Allow the intestines and stomach to roll outward and hang (fig. 45).
Do not allow them to fall because the esophagus will tear and spill
its contents onto the carcass.

  [Illustration: Man pushing knife down through abdomen wall]
  Figure 43.—Opening the midline.

  [Illustration: Man pushing knife down through abdomen wall]
  Figure 44.—Opening the midline.

  [Illustration: Intestines and stomach exposed out front]
  Figure 45.—Intestines and stomach.

Pull the loosened large intestine down past the kidneys (fig. 46).
Sever the attachments to the liver and remove it by pulling outward
and cutting the connective tissue (fig. 47). Remove the gall bladder
from the liver by cutting beneath it and pulling (fig. 48). Be careful
not to allow its contents to spill onto the liver.

  [Illustration: Man pulling out large intestine]
  Figure 46.—Pulling large intestine.

  [Illustration: Man slicing out liver]
  Figure 47.—Removing liver.

  [Illustration: Man slicing gall bladder off liver]
  Figure 48.—Removing gall bladder.

Pull the stomach and intestines outward and cut through the diaphragm
(fig. 49). This is the thin sheet of muscle and white connective
tissue that separates the stomach and intestines from the lungs and
heart. Pull outward on the lungs and heart and cut down each side of
the windpipe, severing its attachment at the head (fig. 50). To
separate the heart from the lungs, cut across its top (fig. 51). The
heart should be split open to allow thorough washing. Wash the heart
and liver thoroughly and put them in ice or ice water.

  [Illustration: Man slicing down through diaphragm]
  Figure 49.—Cutting diaphragm.

  [Illustration: Man pulling down and slicing off windpipe]
  Figure 50.—Removing windpipe.

  [Illustration: Man slicing off heart from lungs]
  Figure 51.—Removing heart.


                     Splitting and Head Removal

Wash the inside of the carcass before splitting. With the saw, begin
splitting from the inside between the hams (fig. 52). Keep the split
as near the center of the backbone as possible, and saw through the
tail region to a point midway through the loin (fig. 53). Move around
to the back and continue sawing through the shoulder and neck to the
base of the head (fig. 54). If the split gets off center, continue
sawing through to the next vertebra and then realign the saw.

  [Illustration: Man facing chest running saw down back backbone]
  Figure 52.—Splitting.

  [Illustration: Man facing chest running saw down back backbone]
  Figure 53.—Splitting.

  [Illustration: Man facing chest running saw down back backbone]
  Figure 54.—Splitting.

Remove the head at the atlas joint (the joint closest to the head).
This joint should be exposed if the carcass is properly split (fig.
55). After cutting through the joint cut downward along the jaw
bone, leaving the jowls attached to the carcass. If desired, remove
the tongue, wash it thoroughly, and place it with the liver and heart.

  [Illustration: Man using knife to remove head]
  Figure 55.—Removing head at atlas joint.

Remove the kidneys and leaf fat (figs. 56 and 57). The leaf fat is
removed by loosening it from the diaphragm muscle and lifting it
upward. Wash the carcass thoroughly before chilling.

  [Illustration: Man using knife to cut out kidney]
  Figure 56.—Removing kidney.

  [Illustration: Man removing leaf fat]
  Figure 57.—Removing leaf fat.


                       Examining the Carcass

All the internal organs and the dressed carcass (fig. 58) should be
examined carefully for any abnormalities or conditions that might
affect the fitness of the meat for food. Usually a meat inspector or
graduate veterinarian is the only person qualified to do this, and one
should be present to inspect the carcass; however, under farm
conditions, you may need to look for the obvious signs of disease or
damage yourself. If any part of the viscera or carcass is
questionable, you should obtain expert advice.

Bruises, minor injuries, parasites in the organs, enclosed abscesses,
and single tumors are frequently local conditions that can be easily
removed. However, congestion or inflammation of the lungs, intestines,
kidneys, inner surface of chest, or abdominal cavity and numerous
yellowish or pearl-like growths scattered throughout the organs should
be viewed seriously. Carcasses and viscera having such abnormalities
should be examined by a graduate veterinarian and his opinion obtained
as to the wholesomeness of the meat. _You should check with a
cooperating veterinarian before you slaughter the animal to be certain
he will be available if you should seek his advice_.

  [Illustration: Hanging split carcass]
  Figure 58.—Completed carcass.




                      CHILLING THE CARCASS

The surfaces of freshly slaughtered hog carcasses are contaminated
with bacteria that can spoil the meat unless their growth is promptly
checked. Bacterial growth can be slowed by prompt chilling and keeping
the carcass at low temperatures. If the weather is suitable (28° to
35° F), the carcass can be wrapped in a sheet, hung, and chilled in a
well-ventilated shed. Wrapping with clean cloth will partially protect
the carcass from contamination.

_Do not allow the carcass to freeze_ because freezing within 1 day
after death may toughen the meat. If the carcass cannot be chilled to
below 40° F on the farm, it should be transported to a local locker
plant or market for chilling. The need for prompt and thorough
chilling of warm carcasses cannot be over-emphasized for the
inhibition of bacterial growth. The carcass can be cut into retail
cuts after it has been chilled for 24 to 48 hours.




                              CUTTING

Use the following guidelines in determining cutting and packaging
instructions for the processor if the carcass is not cut and wrapped
on the farm.

_Chops_.—Can be broiled, braised, or pan fried. Chops should be at least
one-half to three-fourths of an inch thick for frying or braising, and
1 inch thick for broiling. Figure one or two chops per serving. Allow
three-fourths of a pound of uncooked meat (bone-in) per person as a
guide.

_Roasts_.—Allow three-fourths of a pound per serving for bone-in roasts
(ham, picnic, shoulder) and one-half pound per serving for boneless
roast (boned and rolled Boston butt or shoulder).

_Sausage_.—Allow one-third pound per serving.


                       Carcass Cutting Equipment

Elaborate and expensive equipment is not necessary but certain items
are essential. The following equipment is recommended (fig. 59):

  1. Steel
  2. Boning knife
  3. Large steak knife
  4. Meat saw
  5. Freezer paper (see section on “wrapping”)
  6. Freezer tape
  7. Meat grinder (electric or hand powered)
  8. Clean water

  [Illustration: Saw, knives, and steel]
  Figure 59.—Equipment for cutting.


                         Cutting the Carcass

Remove the hind foot by sawing through the hock joint at the right
angle to the length of the foot (fig. 60).

  [Illustration: Man sawing off lower hind leg]
  Figure 60.—Removing hind foot.

The ham may be removed two ways. The long-cut ham is cut off at the
pelvic arch (bend in the backbone) perpendicular to the length of
the side (fig. 61). This style ham lends itself to dry salt curing and
aging. The popular short-cut ham is separated from the side by a cut
approximately halfway between the pelvic arch and the end of the
pelvic bone at a right angle to the shank (fig. 62).

  [Illustration: Man sawing off ham]
  Figure 61.—Removing long ham.

  [Illustration: Man slicing off ham]
  Figure 62.—Removing short ham.

The front foot is removed by sawing through the hock (knee) joint at a
right angle to the length of the foot (fig. 63). A shoulder hock may
be cut off about halfway up the leg (fig. 64). To separate the
shoulder from the loin and belly, locate the second rib from the front
and saw through the center of this rib (fig. 65).

  [Illustration: Man sawing off lower front leg]
  Figure 63.—Removing front foot.

  [Illustration: Man sawing off section of upper front leg]
  Figure 64.—Shoulder hock.

  [Illustration: Man sawing through upper chest]
  Figure 65.—Shoulder removal.

The remaining part (middle) is divided into the loin and the belly by
a straight cut from the edge of the tenderloin muscle on the ham end
through a point on the first rib about 2 inches from the protruding
edge of the split backbone (figs. 66 and 67).

  [Illustration: Man cutting with knife along chest]
  Figure 66.—Separating middle from loin.

  [Illustration: Man sawing along chest]
  Figure 67.—Separating middle from loin.

The tail, backbone, and flank are removed from the ham; and the fat
over the inside (top), in the pelvic area, and along each side is
trimmed close to the lean (fig. 68). Most of the skin and fat are left
on the long-cut ham with only a short bevel at the butt (loin) end.
Five or six inches of skin may be removed from the short-cut ham by
cutting under the skin approximately half the distance between the
butt edge and the hock (fig. 69). The exposed fat is then smoothly
tapered to a thickness of about one-half inch at the butt end (fig. 70).

  [Illustration: Picture of trimmed ham]
  Figure 68.—Trimming short ham.

  [Illustration: Man slicing off skin and fat from ham]
  Figure 69.—Trimming short ham.

  [Illustration: Picture of trimmed ham]
  Figure 70.—Trimmed short ham.

The fat back is removed from the loin. Starting along the backbone
side at the shoulder end, cut and lift the fat over the curve of the
loin muscles, being careful not to cut into the lean (fig. 71).
Surface fat on the loin can then be trimmed to approximately
one-fourth inch in thickness (fig. 72). The loin can be roasted whole,
cut into smaller roasts, or sliced into chops (fig. 73). Shoulder,
rib, loin, and sirloin chops are made from the loin. However, the most
popular chops are from the shoulder end and the center (loin) portion.
The ham end is more often roasted. Cut chops one-half to three-fourths
of an inch thick for broiling or frying. Chops for stuffing are easily
made by cutting them two ribs thick and making a pocket between the
ribs. Be careful not to cut through the outer fat surface (fig. 74)
when making chops for stuffing.

  [Illustration: Man slicing fat off loin]
  Figure 71.—Trimming loin.

  [Illustration: Picture of trimmed loin]
  Figure 72.—Trimmed loin.

  [Illustration: Picture of loin roasts and chops]
  Figure 73.—Loin roasts and chops.

  [Illustration: Picture of loin chops]
  Figure 74.—Loin chops.

Remove the neck bones from the shoulder by cutting beneath the ribs to
the backbone and along each side of the vertebrae, then lift and cut
closely around the vertebrae to complete their removal (fig. 75). Cut
off the flap of skin, fat, and lean where the hock joins the shoulder
(fig. 76). The jowl is removed by a straight cut, parallel to the cut
which separates the shoulder from the side, just behind the curve or
“dip” in the skin where the ear was removed (fig. 77). Bevel the fat
and skin at the top edge of the shoulder (fig. 78).

  [Illustration: Man slicing off neck bones]
  Figure 75.—Removing neck bones.

  [Illustration: Man slicing off fat from shoulder]
  Figure 76.—Trimming pork shoulder.

  [Illustration: Man slicing off jowl]
  Figure 77.—Removing jowl.

  [Illustration: Picture of trimmed pork shoulder]
  Figure 78.—Trimmed pork shoulder.

The shoulder can be divided into a picnic shoulder and a blade Boston
roast by making a cut at a right angle to the sides, starting one-half
inch below the edge of the blade bone (figs. 79 and 80). Bevel the
skin and fat along the edge of the picnic shoulder (fig. 81). Remove
the skin and fat (clear plate) from the Boston roast by starting at
the corner over the blade bone and lifting it up and back (fig. 82).
Trim the surface fat to a thickness of approximately one-fourth inch
(fig. 83).

  [Illustration: Man slicing shoulder into two pieces]
  Figure 79.—Preparing Boston and picnic shoulder.

  [Illustration: Two roughly equal size shoulder parts, fat side down]
  Figure 80.—Boston and picnic shoulder.

  [Illustration: Picnic shoulder fat side up]
  Figure 81.—Trimmed picnic shoulder.

  [Illustration: Man pulling up and slicing off shoulder fat cap]
  Figure 82.—Trimming Boston shoulder.

  [Illustration: Trimmed Boston shoulder, fat side up]
  Figure 83.—Trimmed Boston shoulder.

The blade Boston roast can be sliced into steaks or used as a roast.
It can be made into a boneless cut by removing the portion of the
blade bone (fig. 84). The roast can be rolled and tied with strong
twine or cord to make an easily carved roast (fig. 85). Be sure to tie
the roast so that the back muscles run lengthwise.

  [Illustration: Boston shoulder with blade bone sliced off]
  Figure 84.—Removing blade bone.

  [Illustration: Rolled Boston shoulder tied with loops of string]
  Figure 85.—Boneless, tied Boston shoulder.

Separate the spareribs from the belly by cutting closely underneath
the ribs beginning at the flank end of the ribs (fig. 86).

  [Illustration: Man slicing off spare ribs]
  Figure 86.—Removing spareribs.

Prepare a bacon side from the belly by first trimming the lean at the
shoulder end approximately the same thickness as the lean in the area
where the spareribs were removed. Remove any thin or ragged pieces of
lean. Turn the belly over and press it flat. Remove the lower edge by
a straight cut, parallel to the cut separating the belly from the loin
and just inside the teat line on gilt and barrow bellies (fig. 87).
Any enlarged or dark mammary glands should be removed. Trim the flank
edge at a slight angle so the bacon side is approximately 1 inch
longer on the midline edge—the side opposite the cut made to separate
the loin from the belly. This extra length will compensate for
differences in shrinkage during curing.

  [Illustration: the belly and trimmed edges]
  Figure 87.—Trimming belly.

Sausage is made from the fat and lean trimmings produced from making
trimmed hams, loins, bellies, picnic shoulders, and Boston roasts. If
lean or additional sausage is desired, a picnic shoulder can be boned
and added to the trimmings. Sausage should have a lean content of more
than 50 percent. Remove skin, bone, cartilage, and bloody portions
from the meat before grinding (fig. 88).

  [Illustration: Man slicing small portions off bones]
  Figure 88.—Skinning pork trimmings.


                              Wrapping

Fresh pork should be properly wrapped, quickly frozen, and stored at a
temperature of -10° F or lower immediately after cutting. Proper
wrapping is essential to maintain meat quality:

  • use moisture and vapor-proof wrap such as heavily waxed or
    specially laminated freezer paper

  • prepare convenient family-sized packages wrap meat tightly to
    eliminate as much air as possible

  • use a proper wrapping procedure (fig. 89) label and date each
    package properly

  [Illustration: Drawing showing 5 steps to wrapping meat]
  Figure 89.—Wrapping procedures.




                     FREEZING AND FROZEN STORAGE

Frozen pork, particularly cured or seasoned pork, will not retain its
quality as long as beef or lamb. Pork should be frozen as soon after
cutting as possible before any spoilage or rancidity can occur.
Usually the hams, bacon, and shoulders are cured and do not require
freezing. There should be ample freezer space available for fresh
cuts. When using the home freezer be sure to:

  • clean and defrost freezer
  • freeze meat at -10° F or lower temperature
  • freeze only the amount that will freeze in 24 hours
  • allow ample air circulation by not over-packing the freezer
  • maintain the freezer at a temperature of 0° F or less for storage

Recommended freezer storage times for pork as published in G-160,
“Pork in Family Meals,” (see page 64) are as follows:

  chops           3–4 months
  roasts          4–8 months
  fresh sausage   1–2 months
  variety meats     1 month or less
  cured hams      1–2 months

When thawing frozen pork (or any meat), it is best to thaw it in the
original package in the refrigerator. Allow approximately 3 hours per
pound for small roasts and chops. Meat should not be thawed at room
temperature because of increased chances of food spoilage. If thawed
properly at refrigerator temperatures, the meat can be refrozen with
minimal loss of quality which results from drip, etc. Meat cooked from
the frozen state is similar in palatability to thawed meat but
requires up to one-third more cooking time.




                        FURTHER PROCESSING

                            Curing Pork

_Precautions_: The suggestions described in this bulletin are intended
for use at home or on the farm where facilities for curing are
limited. The continued use of nitrates and nitrites in meat curing is
presently being investigated by the United States Department of
Agriculture and the Food and Drug Administration. Therefore, before
using nitrates (saltpeter) and nitrites as mentioned in this
bulletin, check with your local county agent to determine whether its
use has been rescinded. For establishing a commercial curing
operation, contact the local Extension Service or your State
Department of Agriculture for methods and regulations, or write to the
USDA, Food Safety and Quality Service, Washington, D.C. 20250.

The USDA has recommended that nitrates (saltpeter) not be permitted in
commercial curing operations using _curing solutions_. Nitrates would
still be permitted in very limited amounts in dry cured or fermented
sausages because of their importance in flavor, color fixation, and
retarding bacterial growth. Be _very careful_ in adding nitrates to
your meat—they are very poisonous in large amounts.

_Nitrites_ may be toxic when eaten in large quantities. Care should be
taken to use only the required amount. They may be purchased from farm
supply stores and some drug stores. Very small quantities of sodium or
potassium nitrites are used in curing solutions. It is advisable to
have your supplier measure and package separately the amounts you plan
to use. For example, the formula for sweet pickle cure includes only
1.18 ounce (33.45 grams or two and a half tablespoons) of nitrite
per 100 pounds of meat. Several packages of exactly this amount would
greatly aid in preparing curing solutions.

Do not put meat in cure until it has been thoroughly chilled for at
least 24 hours. In addition, do not stack cuts which have not been
properly chilled because stacking slows chilling and may result in
spoilage. Frozen cuts should be thawed prior to curing.

Weigh curing ingredients carefully. Too little salt may allow
spoilage. Too much salt will make meat hard, dry, and salty.

Suggestion: Numerous states have published excellent illustrated
bulletins on curing meat on the farm. The following bulletins* are
recommended:

  * A small fee may be required.

  1. Curing Hams Country Style. North Carolina Agr. Ext. Service
     Cir. No. 405, by J. A. Christian and T. N. Blumer. January 1971.
     North Carolina State University, Raleigh, N.C. 27607.

  2. Curing Georgia Hams. University of Georgia Cooperative Ext.
     Service Bul. No. 627, by J. A. Christian. 1973. University of
     Georgia, Athens, Ga. 30601.

  3. Pork Processing on the Farm. University of Kentucky Cooperative
     Ext. Service Cir. No. 621, by W. Y. Varney and J. D. Kemp,
     University of Kentucky, Lexington, Ky. 40506

  4. Curing Ham—Virginia Style. Virginia Polytechnic Institute &
     State University Ext. Div. Publication No. 223, by R. F. Kelly,
     P. P. Graham, J. D. Baldock and Jo Anne Barton. 1974. VPI,
     Blacksbury, Va. 24061

All parts of the pork carcass can be cured. The hams, shoulders, and
bellies are usually cured. Although the loin can be cured, it is
generally used fresh as chops or roasts.

The ingredients used in curing are salt, sugar, and sodium nitrate or
nitrite. Salt is the preserving agent; nitrates (dry cure only) and
nitrites are added for color and flavor development, but are also
preserving agents. Sugar is used to counteract the harshness of salt.
Commercial cures are available with some added spices and flavorings
to give a characteristic flavor, aroma, or appearance.

Curing pork on the farm is usually done by one of two methods: dry
cure or brine cure (plain or sugar-cured).


                             Dry Curing

The dry cure method entails rubbing meat with curing ingredients.
Check the internal temperature of the largest cut. Be sure it is below
40° F. Federal meat inspection regulations state that the temperature
of meat being dry cured should not be allowed to go below 36° F during
the salt cure equalization period. Weigh the meat and curing
ingredients accurately. For 100 pounds of meat, use an 8-2-2 mix.

  • 8 pounds salt
  • 2 pounds sugar
  • 2 ounces sodium nitrate (dry cure only)

Mix curing ingredients thoroughly. For curing hams and picnic
shoulders, divide into three equal parts. Rub one part of the mixture
on all surfaces of the meat, making sure to push the mixture into the
shank end of the hams. Put a thin layer (one-eighth inch) of cure over
all cuts and stack in the curing room, skin side down on a table or
shelf. On the fifth day, remove the hams and shoulders and apply the
second one-third of the cure. Apply the last one-third on the tenth day.

Bellies will usually cure with only one application. However, like
hams and shoulders, they can be resalted on the fifth day.

Federal meat inspection regulations state that the salt (cure)
equalization period for hams and picnics is usually less than about 40
days or 3 days per pound of product (fresh weight). Bellies are
commonly cured about 7 days per inch of thickness.

The curing pork should be stored in a refrigerated place where a
constant temperature between 36° F and 42° F is maintained. Bacteria
grow rapidly in unsalted meat when the temperature rises above 50° F.

After curing, soaking the meat will improve its quality and
appearance. Soak in lukewarm water (not exceeding 70° F) for
approximately 2 minutes for each day in cure. Soaking tends to
distribute the seasoning more evenly and draws out some of the heavy
salt concentration on the meat surface. Hang cuts up to dry for about
3 hours before smoking.


                          Sweet Pickle Cure

Place chilled, trimmed cut into a clean crock or barrel and cover with
a cold pickle solution. The pickle solution is made by dissolving the
following ingredients in 4½ gallons of water:

  • 8 pounds salt
  • 3 pounds sugar
  • 1.18 ounce (33.45 grams or two and a half tablespoons) sodium
    nitrite (see precautions on nitrite).

Weight the meat down to keep it from floating and cover it with curing
solution. Keep the meat cold during the curing period (36° to 40° F).

Overhaul the meat about once or twice during the curing period to
allow the pickle to reach all parts of the meat. To overhaul, remove
all the meat, pour out the pickle, repack the meat, and cover with the
same restirred pickle. To the extent possible, the cuts should be
repacked so that surfaces that were previously in contact with other
cuts are now exposed to the curing solution.

Curing time for hams and shoulders is 3½ to 4 days per pound. Thus
a 6-pound shoulder needs 24 days to cure and a 15-pound ham will
require 60 days. A 10-pound belly will cure in about 15 days. However,
heavier bellies and loins will require 21 days.

During curing the temperature of the pickle should be maintained at
around 36° F. At higher temperatures, the brine may become sour or
ropy due to the growth of bacteria. Ropy brine looks like partially
cooked egg white. If this happens, discard the brine, scrub the meat
with hot water, wash and scald the curing container, and repack meat
with a new, cold curing solution. If the curing period was half over,
make the new solution two-thirds the strength of the original. If
three-fourths over, make the new solution one-half the original
strength.

After curing, prepare the meat for smoking by soaking (as discussed
under dry curing) and drying.


                     Pumping Hams and Shoulders

To speed up curing, most commercial packers pump brine into the hams
and shoulders. Brine pumping can be used in conjunction with the other
methods, or alone. Pumping requires special needles and a pump (hand
or electric) to ensure proper distribution of the brine. The brine
solution is prepared using the 8:3:1.18 mixture previously outlined.
Two pounds of this cure mixture are dissolved in 1 gallon of cold
water and the meat pumped with brine equivalent to 10 percent of its
weight. Pumping may be accomplished by using the artery or stitch
method. The femoral artery of the ham is located above the big flat
bone which is cut when the ham is separated from the carcass. The
artery is about halfway between the cut surface of the bone and the
point of the aitch bone. With small forceps, you can clamp the end of
the artery and push tissue and loose fat away so the pumping needle
can be inserted. Stitch pumping is not as effective as artery pumping
but is more so than either dry or pickle cure. Stitch pumping is
accomplished with a spray needle by pumping along the bone, around the
joints, and vertically in thicker, lean parts of the ham or picnic.
Cuts should be stored for a day to allow the cure to equilibrate prior
to smoking.


                              Smoking

Smoking cured pork improves its appearance and gives it a
characteristic aroma and flavor apart from that of any other meat
product. Careful attention should be given to smoking and aging
procedures to prevent microbial spoilage or insect infestation.


                           _Smokehouses:_

The smokehouse can be simple or elaborate in design, depending on the
quantity of meat to be smoked. It should be of reasonably tight
construction to permit easy regulation of temperature and flow of air
and smoke. Special attention during construction should be given to
the control of insect and rodent infestations.

Temporary smokehouses for small quantities of meat can be constructed
cheaply and easily. Construction should include a ventilated enclosure
for hanging and smoking the meat as well as facilities for generating
smoke and supplying it to the house. A barrel or drum with both ends
removed, connected by a stove pipe or a covered trench to a fire pit,
can be used (fig. 90). Set the barrel over the upper end of the 10 to
12 feet of stove pipe, which is sloped downward to the fire pit.
Control the heat of the fire by covering the pit with a piece of sheet
metal and mounding earth around the edges, so as to cut off most of
the draft. Clean muslin or burlap hung over the top of the barrel will
protect a 1-inch opening between the barrel and the cleated top, which
rests on broomsticks supporting the meat (fig. 90). This type of
smokehouse is large enough for the cuts from one hog. An old
refrigerator or a simple frame house can be used rather than a barrel.
The fire can also be built in a ventilated barrel which is connected
to the smokehouse by a stove pipe.

  [Illustration: Cross section of pit, buried pipe, and smoke barrel]
  Figure 90.—Barrel for smoking.

Permanent structures suitable for smoking meat should be constructed
if large quantities of meat are to be smoked. Tight construction and
well-fitted ventilators provide effective regulation of the air flow
past the meat. An outside firebox makes temperature control easy and
reduces fire hazard. Consult the local extension agent for detailed
plans for the construction of permanent smokehouses.


                         _Smoking Process:_

All meat to be smoked should be soaked to remove surface concentration
of salt. Cuts should be allowed to dry since a wet surface will not
take a uniform smoked color.

Hang the cuts in the smokehouse in such a way that cuts do not touch
each other or the wall. Suspend hams and shoulders with string or
clean galvanized wire through the shank. Prior to hanging bellies,
reinforce the ends with hardwood skewers or clean galvanized wire to
hold them square. Bacon hangers can also be made from strips of
non-resinous wood through which several small galvanized nails have
been driven.

In the firepit, build a fire of any hardwood, such as hickory, oak,
apple, pecan, and maple. Hickory is the most popular. NEVER use soft
woods (pine, cedar, spruce, or other “needle leaf” trees) because
their smoke is sooty and contains resin which gives the meat a dark
color, bitter taste, and strong odor. Once the fire is burning, hard
wood sawdust can be added to deaden the blaze and generate more smoke.
Dampen the sawdust with water to prevent it from flaming. A thin haze
of smoke is as effective as a dense cloud.

The absorption of smoke and the change in color of the outside surface
of smoked meat is hastened by high temperatures. The type of
smokehouse and the outside temperatures are important factors in the
length of time required to smoke meat. Federal meat inspection
regulations state that whenever the fresh appearance of a product
containing pork muscle tissue has been altered to resemble a product
that may mistakenly be eaten without cooking or with less than
thorough cooking, it must have been treated in an acceptable manner to
destroy possible live trichinae by heating to an internal temperature
of 137° or otherwise treating (see page 62).

A suggested schedule for smoking pumped or pickled cured hams is as
follows:

  • 4 hours - 120° F damper open - smoke off

  • 6 hours - 140° F damper one-quarter open - smoke on

  • Raise temperature to 170° F and hold until internal temperature
    reaches 142° to 146° F.

To be fully cooked, it is recommended that the cuts remain in the
smokehouse until their internal temperature reaches 152° to 155° F.

For smoking bacon, the following schedule may be used:

  • 2 hours - 115° F damper open - smoke off

  • 2 hours - 130° F damper closed - smoke on

  • Raise temperature to 140° F and hold until internal temperature
    reaches 127–130° F


                     _Storage of Smoked Meats_:

Cured, smoked pork can be handled several ways depending on the final
product desired. It can be eaten immediately, refrigerated or frozen
for future use, canned, or aged for the development of the
characteristic “country-cured” flavor. If the product is to be frozen
or canned, follow the recommendations given in the Wrapping or Canning
sections.


                              Canning

If done properly, pork can be satisfactorily preserved by canning.
Meat is a low acid, high protein food that allows for good bacterial
growth. The use of a pressure canner is vital to ensure that the
sterilization temperature (240° F) is reached and maintained for the
proper length of time. A water bath or a steamer is _not recommended_
since neither one attains a sufficiently high temperature to produce
effective sterilization. Meat may be canned soon after chilling since
aging has little effect on the flavor and tenderness of canned meats.

The proper canning procedure is as follows: Use only pint and quart
jars. Larger jars are difficult to heat thoroughly to the center. Cut
the meat into small strips or cubes. Place meat into a large shallow
pan; add enough water to prevent sticking. Cover the pan and cook
slowly until medium done. Stir occasionally so that the meat heats
evenly. Two and one-half pounds of boneless meat will fill a quart jar.

Pack hot meat loosely in glass jars and cover with hot meat broth or
boiling water. Leave 1 inch of head space. For flavor, salt can be
added to each jar (approximately one-half teaspoon per pint or 1
teaspoon per quart). Clean any residue from the top of the jar and
adjust lids to manufacturer’s specifications and process in a pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F). Process pint jars for 75
minutes; quarts for 90 minutes.

Allow the canner to cool until the pressure drops to zero. Don’t pour
cold water over the canner to hasten the cooling. Remove the jars and
space them a few inches apart to cool.

If a jar does not seal, re-can the meat in another jar or use it for
food at once. When re-canning, heat the meat through. Then pack and
process in pressure canner for the full time recommended. Store sealed
jars of canned meat in a cool, dry place and don’t allow it to freeze.


                           Lard Rendering

To produce a high quality lard with good stability, remove all the
skin and lean from the back-fat and other fat trimmings. Fats from
around the internal organs should be rendered separately because they
yield a darker lard than leaf fat and other body fat trimmings.

Cut the fat into small pieces of similar size for quick uniform
rendering. Steam rendering, if available, is most preferable since it
eliminates the danger of scorching. When fat is rendered in a kettle
over an open fire, it should be stirred frequently and the fire should
be kept low to prevent sticking and scorching. Do not use a copper or
brass kettle because these metals cause rapid rancidity.

The temperature of the fat during rendering should remain about 212°
F. As the process continues, water will evaporate and the temperature
will increase. Do not allow it to go above 255° F.

As the rendering process proceeds, the cracklings float to the surface
and become brown in color. When boiling (evaporation of water) ceases,
the rendering process is completed and heating can be discontinued.
Strain the lard through several thicknesses of cheese cloth into lard
pails or crocks, and cool immediately at a temperature near freezing.
While cooling, stir to a creamy stage to prevent graininess. If the
lard is dark in color, it is because it was scorched or there was too
much lean left on the fat. Additional lard can be obtained by pressing
the hot cracklings in a lard press.

Air and light can cause lard to become rancid; therefore, containers
should be filled to the top, sealed tightly and stored in a dark, cool
place.


                           Fresh Sausage

Fresh pork sausage is generally made by grinding and seasoning lean
pork trimmings from bellies, hams, and shoulders. Fresh sausage should
contain about 20 to 30 percent fat. If more fat is included, the
sausage may be too greasy and shrink a lot in cooking. If entire
shoulders or hams are used, it may be necessary to add some fat.

Prepare sausage by grinding the meat through a coarse plate (½-inch
holes), mix thoroughly, spread thin, add seasoning, and mix
thoroughly. Regrind through a finer plate (⅛-inch holes), for a more
uniform mix with the seasoning.

For seasoning 100 pounds of trimmings, a suggested seasoning formula
would be the following:

  • 2 pounds of salt
  • 6 ounces of pepper
  • 1 to 2 ounces of sage

Other seasoning such as mace, nutmeg, cloves, or red pepper can be
added in small amounts (not to exceed 5 ounces) if desired.

Seasoned sausage should not be frozen for longer than 2 or 3 months
since salt hastens the rancidity of pork. Unseasoned ground pork may
be frozen for up to 5 to 6 months, then thawed, seasoned, and used.

Sausage may also be stuffed into casings for use either with or
without smoking. Artificial casings can be obtained from local
butchers or natural casings (small intestines) can be used. Natural
casings should be washed thoroughly, cleaned, and scraped prior to
use. Stuffing sausage requires skill and proper equipment. It is best
to have sausage stuffed and smoked by a local custom processor.


                              Scrapple

Scrapple, a favored breakfast dish in many sections, is made of cooked
pork and broth thickened with cornmeal, flour, and sometimes shorts.
The following formula is popular:

  • 30 pounds of cooked and ground meat
  • 30 quarts of broth
  • 10 pounds of cornmeal
  • 3 pounds of buckwheat or rye flour
  • 1½ pounds of rolled oats
  • 15 ounces of salt
  • 3 ounces of pepper

Cuts of pork such as the head, tail, kidneys, heart, tongue (skinned),
spareribs, and pork trimmings may be used to make scrapple. Clean and
trim all pieces thoroughly and place them in a pot or vessel; cover
with water and cook until the meat separates easily from the bone.
Separate the meat from the bones and grind or chop fine. After
grinding return the meat to the broth and bring to a boil, add corn
meal, buckwheat flour, and rolled oats and cook until the mixture has
the consistency of thick mush. Season with salt, pepper, and spices;
remove from the heat and pour into molds or shallow pans to harden.

When adding the cereal, moisten it with some of the cooled broth so
that it may be added without forming lumps.

If made properly, scrapple can be sliced and fried easily with little
crumbling.


                             Headcheese

Headcheese is easy to make. Split the head, remove the eyes, clean the
ears and nostrils, cover the cleaned pieces in water with the tongue,
heart, and some lean trimmings and cook until the meat is well done
and separates easily from the bones. Grind the meat and cover with
broth. Add seasoning (salt, pepper, and others if desired), cook for
15 to 20 minutes and pour into pans. Headcheese can be eaten cold or
fried the same as scrapple or panhas. Headcheese does not hold
together as well as scrapple because of the absence of corn meal and
flour.

The following quantities of seasoning per 100 pounds of cooked meat,
including the added broth, are recommended:

  2–2½ pounds of salt

  3–5 ounces of black pepper

  1 ounce of red pepper

  1 ounce of ground cloves (if desired)

  1 ounce of coriander (if desired)

  2 ounces of sweet marjoram (if desired)


                          Panhas (pon-hos)

Using the broth remaining after making headcheese, strain out all the
bones and thicken with corn meal, buckwheat or rye flour. Use three or
four parts broth to one part meal to make a thick paste. To prevent
lumping, it is best to slightly moisten the meal with a little cooled
broth before adding it to the other broth. Season to taste with the
seasonings given for headcheese. Cook for 30 to 45 minutes and pour
into shallow pans to cool. Slice and serve like scrapple.


                         Pickled Pigs’ Feet

Pigs’ feet should be clean, free from hair, and the toes removed. Make
certain to clean between the toes and trim any remaining hair.

Cure clean, chilled feet in brine for 15 days to 3 weeks. Use the same
brine suggested for curing hams. Weight the feet to keep them from
floating above the solution. Use enough solution to completely
submerge the feet. Keep the feet cold throughout curing period (at 36°
to 40° F, if possible).

After curing, slowly cook or simmer the feet until they are tender.
Cook them slowly to keep the skin from parting excessively and the
feet from pulling out of shape. Thoroughly chill the cured, cooked
feet and pack them in cold, moderately strong vinegar, add spices such
as bay leaves or allspice. Use the feet at once or store them in the
vinegar.




                            MEAT COOKERY

Tender cuts of meat are best cooked with dry heat such as broiling,
roasting, and panbroiling. Less tender cuts of meat are tenderized by
cooking with _moist_ heat. Connective tissue is softened and
tenderized by cooking slowly in moisture.

Temperature control is very important in meat cookery. Meat loses
moisture, fat, and other substances during cooking. However, some of
the meat juices and fat may be retained in the pan drippings.

Cooking losses can be minimized by controlling the oven cooking
temperature and final internal temperature of the meat. Shrinkage is
increased when hot oven temperatures are used for cooking and when
meat is cooked to a higher internal temperature.

The meat thermometer is the most accurate guide to the degree of
doneness of meat. Cooking time in relation to weight is often used as
a guide to the degree of doneness, but this may be influenced by the
cut’s fat and moisture content and by its shape or size.

Fresh pork, smoked picnic shoulder, shoulder roll, and other smoked
products should be cooked to an internal temperature of 160° F (71°
C). Excessive cooking will toughen and dry the meat, thus decreasing
its acceptability.

Hams cooked to 140° F (60° C) are not fully cooked and should be
cooked before eating. Hams which are cooked to 150° F or higher should
require no further cooking and are labeled “fully cooked.”

Trichinae are rarely found in pork; however, precautions should always
be taken. Trichinae are readily destroyed by any of the following
conditions:

  • Heating meat throughout to an internal temperature of 137° F (58° C)
  • Storage at -20° F (-29° C) or below for 6 to 12 days
  • Storage at -10° F (-23° C) or below for 10 to 20 days
  • Storage at 5° F (-15° C) or below for 20 to 30 days

More detailed instructions for cooking procedures can be obtained from
the following source:

  _Lessons on Meat_,
  National Live Stock and Meat Board,
  444 North Michigan Avenue,
  Chicago, Illinois 60611




                            PRECAUTIONS

                              The Law

The Federal Meat Inspection Act requires that all meat which is to be
sold or traded for human consumption must be slaughtered under
inspection in an approved facility under the supervision of a State or
USDA meat inspector. A person can slaughter his animals outside such a
facility only for use by himself, members of his household, his
non-paying guests, or his employees, but he is not allowed to sell any
portion of the carcass. For more details about these regulations,
consult your county extension agent or write to the Food Safety and
Quality Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Washington,
D.C. 20250.




                        OTHER PUBLICATIONS

The following publications give additional information on selecting
and preparing food for your family. Send your requests on a post
card to the Office of Governmental and Public Affairs, U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 20250. Include your return address
and ZIP code.

                                                               Order No.
  Family Food Budgeting—for Good Meals and Good Nutrition         G 94
  Vegetables in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers               G 105
  Beef and Veal in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers            G 118
  Pork in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                     G 160
  Keeping Food Safe to Eat                                        G 162
  Nuts in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                     G 176
  Your Money’s Worth in Foods                                     G 183
  Food                                                            G 228
  Sodium Content of Your Food                                     G 233
  Beef Slaughtering, Cutting, Preserving, and Cooking on the Farm F 2263
  Lamb Slaughtering, Cutting, Preserving, and Cooking on the Farm F 2264

This publication contains public information. It is not copyrighted
and may be reproduced in whole or in part with or without credit.




         ☆ U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1981 O-338-123




------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Illustrations replaced with the text ‘[Illustration]’ or
    ‘[Illustration: some descriptive text]’.  The illustration caption
    is on the following line. Due to the instructional nature of this
    text, extensive illustration descriptions have been added to this
    text only version.
 3. The original was printed in two column text with illustrations
    sometimes spanning both columns. In order to reduce ambiguity, the
    illustrations have been moved adjacent to the paragraph that refers
    to them.
 4. Footnotes have been renumbered.
 5. Italicised words are enclosed by _underscores_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pork Slaughtering, Cutting,
Preserving, and Cooking on , by H. Russell Cross and E. Curtis Green and Roger L. West and Anthony W. Kotula

